---
title: "How does the sub-conscious mind work? Which part of the mind does the sub-conscious mind belong to ?"
tags: ["mind", "sub-concious mind"]
date: "2026-07-03"
contributor: "vidhatrii.sanskrit@gmail.com"
---

**Original Question:**  
How does the sub-conscious mind work? Which part of the mind does the sub-conscious mind belong to ?

**Full Answer:**  
So the conscious mind attends to all works which require the use of the indriyas. It is the conscious mind which has direct interaction with the indriyas. The subconscious mind manages the worldly memory of things which happened in this life, and when things have been done in a repeated fashion like eating or driving a car, it is the subconscious mind that integrates this habitual knowledge into the current task at hand so that it can be carried out mechanically without much effort. But it is important to understand that even there i.e. where a task which has been done many times before is being again repeated and therefore carried out mechanically, even there the conscious mind and its connection with the indriyas is needed. When the conscious mind is not active it means the person is sleeping. During sleep the subconscious mind is active but the conscious mind is not. In that state one cannot drive a car. So by this it is apparent that the conscious mind is needed to drive a car no matter how much practice one has had in driving. Now, let us say that one is awake and driving a car-- mechanically, as it is something one does daily: In that scenario, how far is the involvement of conscious mind needed? Well it is still very much needed as it is the conscious mind that sees the road via the eyes. So for example, if a person is driving their car but also deeply involved in conversation with someone sitting next to them, or even speaking on their mobile phone, that is a potentially dangerous situation as the mechanical work of driving is going on, but the conscious mind is not paying attention to the road. Although the eyes are open and able to see the road, but if the conscious mind is deeply involved in discussion and thus not bringing the road image onto its citta and viewing it (because the citta is occupied with the subject of discussion), then it will not notice that there is a red light and hence it will continue driving mechanically into the intersection and crash into another car. Indeed this is extremely common, hence in the US it is prohibited to speak on one's mobile phone while driving a car. So even in mechanical actions in the world, involvement of both the subconscious mind and the conscious mind are needed. They work in a coordinated cooperative manner in such activities. Otherwise the driver is likely to get into a car crash, and the person taking a hot drink is likely to spill part of it on their lap. And the person walking on a rough, narrow path containing holes is likely to fall down. Even though the action is one which the person has carried out many times, they still have to pay attention to what they are doing with their conscious mind. When a person types at the computer, they take a lot of help from their subconscious mind in making it an automatic process. But the conscious mind is also required. If the conscious mind is deeply involved in some other activity, then the activity of typing will not be possible. 

Finally, if two people are speaking together in person. Then how does it happen that they can both look at each other and also speak to each other? As you might imagine, at any particular moment the mind can either look at the person or listen to what they are saying. They cannot put both the person's image and the person's voice on their citta at the same time. But as you have explained to your students, although the mind cannot "multitask", but it does work quite rapidly and thus alternate quickly between the two activities of seeing and listening so that both activities appear to be continuous. Nonetheless if the listener becomes very much deeply involved in one of the two activities, then the other will not be given attention.

Any further questions about this, let me know.
One follow-up question- when we say subconscious mind,  are we referring to the ahamtattvam or mind in general ? In addition, what do we mean by subconscious mind and unconscious mind? What is the difference between the two? 

Answer: *Subconscious mind* deals primarily with functions related to memory of events in the current life-- things that happened yesterday, last year, ten years ago. And so, naturally, the mechanization of actions done repeatedly in the past comes within its aegis.

*Unconscious mind* manages all the inner essential workings of the body such as breathing, heart beating, blood circulation, temperature control. And the other essential function is, due to its intimate connection to Paramatma, it is the repository in the mind of all knowledge past, present, and future. So all that knowledge is there within the human mind, including knowledge of our past lives. But generally, only knowledge present in the subconsciousness mind is accessible to a human being, because it requires a high level of sadhana to gain access to the repository in the unconscious mind. And the great majority of people do not do any sadhana at all, what to speak of high level sadhana.


