---
title: "How to bring positive change in Society?"
tags: ["miscellaneous", "society"]
date: "2026-06-29"
contributor: "vidhatrii.sanskrit@gmail.com"
---

**Original Question:**  
Clarification provided by Acharya ji

**Full Answer:**  
Both X  ji as well as a brother some time later in the same session, asked good questions regarding how it is that we can bring positive change in society when the society is currently moving in such a different direction? Here the point is that the world has gotten degenerated by materialism and capitalism. But these things are not permanent institutions in the world, and it only highlights how crucial our work is. That the world has gotten degenerated doesn't mean we should throw up our hands, give up any hope, and just start living like everyone else. Rather, this is a critical time in the history of human society and our work with the yogic life, spreading it around the globe, is indeed the crucial medicine which is needed. The day is not far when capitalism will collapse, and we need to be ready to supply the world with guidance as to what is the proper way to live, and how to create a proper human society. We need to have these yogic life programs in schools, teaching the children. Our work is needed everywhere and there is no time to rest. So now is not the time to become hopeless; rather, now is the time our work is urgently needed to save the suffering humanity. Yoga is the medicine, yoga is the need of the day -- yoga in the true sense of the word. Manava dharma, the yogic life, building a true human society. By our example we need to teach all.
