---
title: "Details on something special happening at six o’clock. "
tags: ["creation-cycle", "shristi chakra", "six o’clock."]
date: "2026-07-03"
contributor: "vidhatrii.sanskrit@gmail.com"
---

**Original Question:**  
Details on something special happening at six o’clock. 

**Full Answer:**  
I would recommend that a similar moment for conveying that something very special is happening is six o'clock. Everything you expressed clearly there, just you can give something more to help them get the idea that this is something totally unique. Indeed no one else can explain where life comes from, and so you are giving them something amazing here. Where life comes from, no one has any idea. So this is an opportunity to express something more here to give them a sense of wonder here. You can talk about how from the outside a stone looks like something inert; but this stone is not at all inert, it is not something dead. It is made of purusa, of consciousness-- and as such is very much alive! Purusa is not at all something 'dead', rather it is alive and this is what the stone is made of. So although the stone is not expressing life outwardly, but it has all the shakti of life within it. Tab na usse jiiva nikal sakta hai! It is an extraordinary transition phase of the srsti cakra, and reveals just how vibrant and vital the stone is, that in congenial conditions a jiiva can emerge from it. So this point is really deserving of some heart-felt explanation so that it creates a feeling of wonder in the hearts and minds of those present to listen.
- One of the brothers asked what accounts for the shift to the dominance of sattva guna at that stage, and you said that there is no 'why' here, it is something which happens. But you can explain that all the three gunas are present at every phase, and as you said that at six o'clock tamoguna has reached its maximum and cannot increase its effect of crudification any further. Either the ksiti tattva will explode, or, in congenial conditions, sattvaguna becomes dominant and by that, the conditions for emergence of life become present and active, and life emerges. So the answer to his question is that when congenial conditions are present-- pancha bhuta in requisite proportions i.e. water, air/oxygen etc., and proper temperature is there, then sattvaguna becomes dominant and in that state, rather than visphota, life emerges out of stone. Because all the potential for life is indeed present there in the stone, and was just awaiting those congenial conditions for sattvaguna to become dominant.
Just a few more thoughts about the presentation of srsticakra to a beginner audience. These thoughts are not strict guidelines
- Kendratiga and kendranuga shakti are not introduced in EP but in later discourses because they are not really introductory concepts. They are more complex and difficult to understand, and as such are probably not needed for giving a solid/good introduction to the first time learner. I am not saying that it is wrong to include them or that they must not be included; just that it makes for a simpler and easier to understand presentation if we save these for a higher level discussion later on.  
- If one is going to include these concepts then one needs to make it very clear that there is kendratiga and kendranuga shakti of Prakrti, and then there is kendratiga and kendranuga shakti of ksititattva. It needs to be explicitly pointed out that these four are separate-- two at the macro level of srsti cakra as pertains to Prakrti (saincara-dhara / pratisaincara-dhara), and then two at the micro level of ksititattva. 
- Along with kendratiga and kendranuga shakti, dasha prANAH are also not introduced in EP, and probably aren't needed for the intro level explanation.
- Instead, one can simply explain which guna is dominant at which phase (sattva 12-1, rajo 1-2, tamo 2-6, sattva 6-12), and express that at 6:00 in the absence of congenial conditions, the pressure of tamoguna results in vishphota, and in the presence of congenial conditions, sattvaguna becomes dominant which results in the emergence of life. 
- It would however be very helpful to include the explanation of the logical necessity of reaching to ksititattva in order for the emergency of life. That is to say, the necessity of reaching to such a level of crudity as can support the maintenance of separate objects-- then only can life emerge. Jala, agni, vayu, akasha cannot maintain parts of themselves as separate, whereas ksititattva can -- hence the need for reaching to 6:00 before life can emerge. 
- Everything in srsticakra is subject to karya-karana-bhava. So the shift to the dominance of sattvaguna at 6:00 is the result of karya-karana-bhava; it occurs due to the emergence of congenial conditions. 
- Due to the emergence of congenial conditions, sattvaguna becomes dominant, and due to sattvaguna becoming dominant, life emerges from stone; it is not that life emerges from stone and then sattvaguna becomes dominant.

Four forces kendratiga shakti, kendranuga shakti, how they arise on micro level and why only in ksititattva. As mentioned last week, this is really a bit advanced for them. And I understand, you just wanted to clarify it as you had already introduced it. Here I am explaining a bit more, just for your own understanding-- probably no need to explain this to them, unless you really want to. It is more for a later time when they have already digested the first round of presentations on srsti cakra.

So kendratiga shakti is the name for the shakti of Prakrti on the out-bound side, in saincara dhara, as you already know. So what happens is that when it reaches the stage of ksiti tattva, as ksiti tattva maintains its own separate existence as individual units, in response to the kendratiga shakti of Prakrti (here tamoguna), two forces arise within the unit of ksititattva. This is a direct response to the kendratiga shakti of Prakrti, and it is important to state this. Tamoguna of Prakrti is pushing more and more, exerting more and more pressure on that ksititattva to become more and more dense, more and more sthula. In response to that pressure of Prakrti, an opposing force arises within the ksititattva against the pressure from the outside exerted by Prakrti. That response from ksititattva is what would result in its bursting into its component paincabhutas. So that is the kendratiga shakti of unit ksititattva. But then there is another response which develops within the unit ksititattva against its kendratiga shakti, which is its own kendranuga shakti. And that is the force which holds it together as one unit of ksititattva. And why do kendratiga and kendranuga arise only within ksititattva and not in the other paincabhutas? Because (1) they are not so dense, they have lots of room to become more dense without any reaction against Prakrti, so this is an easy forward path for them; and (2) they do not have any sense of individual unit, so there is no reaction to protect the integrity of a unit as there is in ksititattva.     

