---
title: "Karmaphala"
tags: ["creation-cycle", "karmaphala"]
date: "2026-07-03"
contributor: "vidhatrii.sanskrit@gmail.com"
---

**Original Question:**  
1.⁠ ⁠When we perform any independent action, the Karmaphala is stored in the form of Samskara, and later we experience the Karmaphala. What determines which Karmaphala will be experienced immediately or in this life and which Karmaphala will be experienced later or in the next life?
2.⁠ ⁠If we perform an action with the intention of doing good, but it ends up causing harm, will it result in good or bad Karmaphala? Is Karmaphala determined by the intention behind the action, or solely by the action itself?
3.⁠ ⁠Do Nityakriya (like walking, eating etc) or unintentional action (like killing insects while walking) also incur Karmaphala, or is Karmaphala only generated by intentional or motivated actions?


**Full Answer:**  
Parama Prakrti has her eye on everything going on in the universe and when the appropriate time and circumstance arises for the expression of a particular samskara, then at that time and place it happens. If such an occasion arises in that very lifetime then it will happen within the same lifetime, otherwise in the next one or the one after depending on the samskara and the circumstances required for its expression.
⁠If we perform an action with the intention of doing good, but it ends up causing harm, will it result in good or bad Karmaphala?
- good
Is Karmaphala determined by the intention behind the action, or solely by the action itself?
- by the intention
Samskara is only generated by intentional actions.

