---
title: "Shristi chakra"
tags: ["creation-cycle", "shrishti chakra"]
date: "2026-07-03"
contributor: "vidhatrii.sanskrit@gmail.com"
---

**Original Question:**  
Shristi chakra

**Full Answer:**  
We talk about the principle that as tamoguna continues to increase its effect on the citta of bhuma man, we get the successive emergence of the pancha bhuta, from akasha tattva to ksiti tattva. In the process of this progressive sthulikarana:

1. The intermolecular distance within the component parts of each tattva gradually decreases as the tattva transforms from one tattva into the next.
2. With the emergence of each successive tattva we get the addition of another tanmatra which is conveyed within it. Starting from just shabda tanmatra in Akasha tattva, and progressing to all five tanmatras in ksiti tattva.
3. With the emergency of ksiti tattva we get another characteristic which is unique to this tattva, i.e. not present in the other four. And that is its ability to remain separate from other otherwise similar vastus. So even if we put two stones next to each other in physical contact with each other, they do not merge together but remain as separate stones. Whereas with water, fire, air, and space, this is not the case. if we put some water next to another quantity of water they will become one mass of water, unless separated by a container made of ksiti tattva. The same is true of fire, air and space.

So regarding ice: of the three above-described variables, the characteristics of ice are such that it does not clearly fit in as jala tattva, and nor as ksiti tattva.

1. The intermolectular distance within the component parts of ice actually increase as liquid water transforms into ice. Hence ice is actually less dense than water, which is why ice floats in water whereas stones sink in water. In contrast to ice, the intermolecular distance within the component parts of stone is less than that of water, hence stones are denser than water.
2. In ksiti tattva there are all five tanmatras including the final one, gandha tanmatra, but ice would seem to be similar to liquid water in the sense of not having any gandha.
3. Ice does possess however this third characteristic which is unique to ksiti tattva: if we place two blocks of ice one next to the other in physical contact, they will remain as twp separate blocks of ice. In properly cold conditions, each block of ice maintains its separate identity just as separate stones do.

So taking all this into consideration, will we characterize ice as jala tattva or ksiti tattva? Or as something in between? The notion that it is in between the two may initially seem attractive as there are indeed transitional stages in between each two in the successive transformation from akasha tattva to ksiti tattva. However those "in-between" states are in the process of transitioning from one tattva into the next. Whereas, with ice, so long as it remains composed purely of H2O, no matter how much pressure is applied by tamoguna, it the ice will not get more sthula than ice itself.

