---
title: "Mukti"
tags: ["sadhana", "mukti", "merging with saguna brahma"]
date: "2026-07-03"
contributor: "vidhatrii.sanskrit@gmail.com"
---

**Original Question:**  
Saguna Brahma really wants every one of those entities to reach the Nirguna Brahma, but it doesn't happen. They merge back into Saguna Brahma either through the sadhana and thinking about the Saguna Brahma all the time, or the Parampurusha all the time, or in the natural course of the flow of the thought waves of the qualified entity.

**Full Answer:**  
By that we mean because we said the whole creation could be viewed as a virtual thought waves of Saguna Brahma and every one of the creation is nothing but just thought waves and the humans are at the end of those thought waves and the natural termination of the thought waves could be that it merges back into the Saguna Brahma. Now then that still doesn't, so this form, this action is called Mukti, where the individual unit consciousness attains Mukti and merges with Saguna Brahma, but this is not the emancipation that Saguna Brahma was trying to see happen. Saguna Brahma wanted every one of these units to merge back into Nirguna Brahma and so the Mukti is not really a complete emancipation.
It doesn't address or it doesn't this thing satisfy the intention of Saguna Brahma to get all the individual units to be part of Nirguna Brahma.
It needs to be explained that humans do not merge in SB i.e. get mukti just "in the natural course of the flow of the thought waves of the qualified entity". This is a total misconception and needs to be corrected. The only way a human being gets mukti is through doing sadhana.

