---
title: "Mukti vs. Moksha 2"
tags: ["sadhana", "mukti vs. moksha"]
date: "2026-06-30"
contributor: "vidhatrii.sanskrit@gmail.com"
---

**Original Question:**  
Clarification provided 

**Full Answer:**  
The mukta mind get recycled as a new mind and then get moksha? So it is not that the boundaries of the previous unit mind remain-- this is an important point. Just imagine a huge reservoir of clay that is being used to make pots. And we took an old clay pot that was no longer being used, soaked it in water until it again become clay, and then mixed it into the huge reservoir of clay. So now, what was itself a pot earlier became mixed into the clay reservoir such that in the process of making new pots, parts of that earlier pot became the components of 10,000 new pots. So we cannot say that the old clay pot became a new pot again. In the same way the previous unit mind became part of the ingredients of the overall srsti. Some part of that previous unit mind became part of the water in a river, part of it became part of the leg of a grasshopper, part of it became cement in a building somewhere on earth, part of it became part of the lung in a human being on a different human in a different galaxy. So it is not at all that the earlier unit mind again becomes a new mind with the same boundaries. Those boundaries are finished, and parts of that old unit mind get mixed into things throughout the universe. And some part of it may also remain as Cosmic mahattattva, and some other parts of it may become part of Cosmic citta. And then at a much later time get cycled into the paincabhuta. So there is nothing about that earlier unit mind which remains-- it gets mixed and distributed into the endless process of Cosmic Mind and Srsti Cakra.'
