---
title: "Human beings are the highest-evolved beings"
tags: ["philosophy", "highest evolved beings"]
date: "2026-07-03"
contributor: "vidhatrii.sanskrit@gmail.com"
---

**Original Question:**  
Human beings are the highest-evolved beings

**Full Answer:**  
Now replying on the four points raised earlier.

The first point was regarding the first sentence of EP-- "Human beings are the highest-evolved beings", and that it is not enough to simply say this is obvious or self-evident. It is apparent today on this planet earth, yes, but what if someone were to ask you about (a) the entire universe-- there may be beings more evolved than human beings in other parts of the universe; and (b) the future-- there may be beings more evolved than human beings on this planet earth in the future. Then you will have to say something more than that it is obvious or self-evident. 


To get to the heart of the matter here, we need to look at Srsti cakra. All of you are quite familiar with srsti cakra, so I needn't explain it here. To be clear, regarding what "evolved being" means, we are referring to the path of evolution which is described in the srsti cakra. Here we are not seeing that evolution refers to physical strength. Rather, evolution refer here to a developing complexity and sophistication of both body and mind, starting with one-celled organisms and culminating with human beings, to the point that the body is able to house such a mind which is in turn able to house an infinite desire. The human body is not nearly as strong as that of an elephant, however the human body is far, far more sophisticated and developed than the body of an elephant. The arms and legs of a human, the hands of a human, the voice box of a human, the entire structure of a human body is far more evolved than that of an elephant, such that the human body can house such a developed mind that in turn houses an infinite desire.

What I would like to emphasize here is that, as you all know, the path from 10:00 to 12:00 is tread by human beings. By so doing, human beings complete the cycle of creation. That is to say, by having a developed mind which houses an infinite desire, human beings have all that is required to complete this srsti cakra and thereby bring it to its fulfillment. The reason for creating the universe is so that such beings can be evolved who are able to merge back into and become one with that very Parama Purusa from whom the creation emerged. Human beings fulfill this purpose. We can say by this that human beings fullfil the purpose of the creation. There are human beings on planet earth. There are human beings elsewhere in the universe as well. The living being who has such a developed mind as to house an infinite desire and is thus capable of doing sadhana and merging into the infinite Parama Brahma, is a human being. Just as in ancient times on this earth the human beings were less evolved than the human beings of today but were nonetheless human beings, there are human beings elsewhere in the universe and some of these may be more developed and some less developed than the humans on the earth today. But ALL of them are human beings. Human being means that living being who has a sufficiently developed mind to house a desire for the Infinite Entity. 

Over time, humans will undoubtedly progress, leading to changes in body/brain structure, intelligence, and so forth. However, this does not imply the emergence of a new Shreni (plants, animals, humans). Humans possess everything necessary to merge with the Supreme Being — human body and human mind — which is sufficient to fulfill the purpose of our existence." This is indeed the bottom line. As human beings complete the cycle of creation, human beings will continue to develop and evolve as they have done on this planet earth-- but there will never be a more developed being than the human being. There is no need for it. Human beings, by their evolved mind which houses an infinite desire, are the beings who complete the srsti cakra. That is the bottom line. As such, Madhuratama ji is correct, that "In terms of mind, the highest evolution is already achieved, because the human mind is capable of realizing the infinite, and since we know that there is nothing greater than infinite, this means that human mind is the most capable mind in the entire universe." And as the purpose of the brain is to house the mind, human beings will always have the most developed brain as well. Human beings have been developing since they first took their first steps in this universe, and they will continue to develop and evolve. But there will never be a more evolved being than the human being, who has an infinite desire, does sadhana, merges into and becomes one with Parama Purusa, and thus completes the srsti cakra. Less evolved beings were needed so as to gradually reach to 10:00, and, from there, human beings, having the ability to complete the srsti cakra, are all that is needed and as such there cannot ever be any more evolved being than the human being.

The basic point is very simple: AI is just a machine. It is a tool made by human beings. No matter how developed it becomes, it is a mere machine and cannot have any desires at all, what to speak of a desire for the infinite. It is itself ksititattva, has no mind, and if we are to locate it in srsti cakra we will place it at 6:00, in the same location as stones, iron, and other items of ksititattva.  

The very first step in evolution is for something to emerge from ksititattva under congenial conditions, such that the shakti it contains takes the form of life. It must emerge from ksititattva to become alive-- to become a jiiva. And on this point there is absolutely no question of AI being "alive". 

Under congenial conditions, the kendratiga and kendranuga shakti-- the forces acting upon and within the ksititattva which we have discussed together in many satsang sessions result in the emergence of life from stone (rather than the explosion of the stone back into painca tattva and back to 3:00). And when this happens, we get a one-celled organism which has dasha práńáh (the ten vital energies), as a result of which the metabolic processes of life begin in that jiiva, and due to the impact of sattvaguna, as the ksititattva becomes a jiiva, from within the ksititattva emerges mind and associated jiivatma which is linked with it from the infinite pool of shuddha purusa or consciousness. From then begins the process of samgharsa and samiiti which results in the evolution into more and more developed life forms. A computer (i.e. AI) has not even begun any of this. It is completely sthula, and as such is located at 6:00 in srsti cakra. It does not have dasha práńáh, it does not have any metabolic processes within it, it does not eat to get energy, it does not require water or oxygen, it has no brain, no mind, and no atma. It is just ksititattva, arranged by human beings in such a way that when supplied with electric power it begins to do some work as any other electric tool.

So in sum this is a very simple matter for a sadhaka. A computer, no matter how developed, is nirjiiva-- it has no práńáh, no mind, no atma, no desires, and as such is located at 6:00 in srsti cakra. There is no question of its even being alive, what to speak of having desires or moving towards the infinite. This is a very simple matter, and Hrdayesh ji you can explain this to your class if you like. Hariharan was thinking this is a complicated matter, but it is not at all complicated. Machines can never have any role in pratisaincara-dhara. Made of iron, plastic, and other items of ksititattva they are located at 6:00, awaiting congenial conditions for life to emerge out of their crude components. 

Insects and mice are more advanced on the path of moving toward the infinite compared to any computer, as computers haven't even begun the journey of pratisaincara-dhara.

