---
title: "What is Dharma?"
tags: ["philosophy", "dharma"]
date: "2026-07-03"
contributor: "vidhatrii.sanskrit@gmail.com"
---

**Original Question:**  
What is Dharma?

**Full Answer:**  
Two points that are important for all to understand--

1. Dharma: It is not that this definition of dharma is for yoga, and the definition of dharma as "duty" is for another philosophy and both are fine, they sit side by side, both legitimate. Rather, dharma is a concept that conveys transcendentality. It is transcendental, universal-- it applies to all human beings. Whereas everyone has different duties. So dharma cannot mean "duty". The meaning expressed in yoga is the only correct meaning. 

The usages of dharma as 'religion' or as 'duty' are misguided, incorrect usages. Dharma as a universal, defining characteristic that makes something what it is-- this is the proper meaning and it is etymologically based. It is the शाब्दिक अर्थ । This is how the word is derived from धृ-धातु । 
2. Animals follow animal dharma appropriately because they are animals and so, having finite desires, they do not abuse the four aspects of animal dharma. But human beings have infinite desire and, if they do not realize this, then they will apply their infinite desire to the pashu dharma within them and thereby go on unnecessarily accumulating all those physical things-- food, money, fancy cars and clothing, etc. Infinite desire does not work together with finite things-- it gives rise to the abuse of those finite things. So humans abuse the pashu dharma within them. And this is how 99% of people live--they spend their lives trying to satisfy the infinite desire within them through finite things, and it doesn't work. They abuse those material faculties, and it doesn't even bring them happiness.

Some have mentioned in their sessions that it is natural for human beings to pursue name and fame, money, political power, etc as humans have infinite desire. But this is not natural; it is an abuse of their infinite desire in the wrong direction, which results from one having an infinite desire but not realizing that this is what it is.

