---
title: "Greens"
tags: ["food", "greens"]
date: "2026-07-03"
contributor: "vidhatrii.sanskrit@gmail.com"
---

**Original Question:**  
In India most vendors grow the greens like spinach, methi etc near the gutter using gutter water, would that then be considered tamasik?

**Full Answer:**  
One thing I would like to mention here though: the students in our classes are still taking dairy products, vegetable oil, onion, and garlic. These are consumed daily. The other long list of this leaf and that leaf, this dal and that dal, those are only rarely consumed if ever. So I would not focus on these, otherwise it just seems like a huge long list of things which is impossible to follow. But the main guideline is simple: no animal products, and only whole plant foods with no onion or garlic. If they follow this much, they have 99.9% of the work done. So just focus on this with them: no animal products, and only whole plant foods with no onion or garlic. By the phrase "only plant foods" one achieves exclusion of all the main things which need to be excluded: oil, salt, sugar, company products. For now, I would forget about that list of other leaves and dals -- it just serves to distract their mind from the main subject at hand.
Regarding irrigation of fields with gutter water: if one is aware that this is going on at a certain bazar, then one should not purchase one's vegetables there. Although boiling one's vegetables will kill bacteria which came from sewage, but boiling will not remove the heavy metals and other chemicals which are present in sewage. So, true-- have everyone avoid crops which are produced using irrigation from sewage. As to whether we would call such spinach tamasik, yes-- probably would. But that does not mean we should avoid spinach or should not eat it raw. We should eat spinach, we must eat spinach, and it is by far the best to eat it raw. But just, we should avoid purchasing vegetables from vendors who use such practices.

