---
title: "Saindhava lavana rock salt "
tags: ["food", "salt"]
date: "2026-07-03"
contributor: "vidhatrii.sanskrit@gmail.com"
---

**Original Question:**  
Saindhava lavana rock salt is very good for health and should be included in the diet.

**Full Answer:**  
It is very true that there are certain areas of knowledge where modern science is inadequate. The main area is that of spirituality and consciousness (purusa). The reason for the inadequacy of modern science in the field of spirituality and consciousness is that science can only address that which is indriya-grAhya, i.e. graspable by the sense organs. Science maintains that the mind is reducible to the brain i.e. that there is nothing beyond the electrical functioning of the brain. But the yogii understands that there are three levels of existence-- the physical, the mental, and the spiritual. Body, mind, and spirit-- these three levels of existence pervade the entire universe. And consciousness goes beyond that even, to the level of Nirguna Brahma, or shuddha purusa, unqualified consciousness. The arena of mind and consciousness is beyond the ambit of modern science.

However, that which is within the ambit of modern science i.e. the expressed world of the five fundamental factors, that is fully within the ambit of modern science. In this arena, modern science is unparalled. The main reason being that that which modern science claims as true has been tested and proven. One has to always examine the research and confirm that it has been well execuated. In the arena of medicine, we use randomized controlled prospective trials to test theories and see if they are true. For example, if we take one group of people and put them on a typical diet consisting of meat, fish, eggs, and dairy products, and take a similar group of people and put them on a whole-food, plant-based diet, we find that those on the meat-based diet develop all sorts of disease (obesity, hypertension, heart attacks, strokes, diabetes, etc), whereas those on the plant-based diet do not develop any of those diseases. The value of such studies cannot be contested. It is on the basis of such research that we know that human beings are far, far more healthy when they eat plants than when they eat animals and products made from animals.

The theories and treatments in ayurveda need to be put to similar rigorous testing to assess their truth value. Then only can we know whether a particular treatment works or not. It may be that a particular ayurvedic treatment is extremely effective. And a particular person may even like to say that all ayurvedic treatments are effective. Ok, if that is the case than those treatments will surely stand the test of a randomized controlled trial. The treatment should work. If it yields the results it claims to, then it will be accepted and embraced by the entire world. On the other hand, if it does not yield the results it claims to, then that treatment should be duly rejected. I have personally seen that large numbers of people who have lost most of their vision due to diabetes and other issues go to a very well reputed ayurvedic eye hospital in Kerala. Over the course of years of ayurvedic treatment, their eye sight does not improve. But they do not have any other option, so they keep going back again and again. This sort of holding out hope to a desperate population-- those who have lost their eyesight-- is not ethical. Treatments should be proven to work.

It is a well-proven fact that fruits, vegetables, grains and beans contain all the electrolytes including salt, which human beings require. There is absolutely no need for adding salt in the diet. And it is furthermore well tested and proven that when people use added salt in their diet they are at high risk of hypertension (high blood pressure) and resultant heart disease, kidney disease, and hemorrhagic stroke. As a result of the above two well-proven facts (1) that plant foods contain all the salt which a human needs, and (2) that when humans add salt to their diet they raise their risk for very serious diseases which people on a whole-food, plant-based diet do not develop, we are confirmed that human beings should not add any salt to their food. They should not use added salt in a "moderate amount"; rather, then should not use it at all. Furthermore, salt or sodium chloride in all its existing forms -- whether gotten from the sea (sea salt), or from stones (rock salt) -- and whether refined or unrefined, is all chemically the same and has the exact same harmful effect on the body. The notion that salt from the sea or as contained in rocks etc is somehow more healthy for the body is merely an empty claim which has no grounding in truth.

